and agreed that we would try to set a price on it
and first try to sell it ourselves and then thus
avoiding the having to pay the real estate fee then
since we had March, April, May, and June before
moving west to begin work on July 1, then we could
later hand the matter over to a real estate agent.
So when we went to sleep that night, we each agreed
we were mentally and emotionally exhausted but
were hopeful for the future.
The next morning the phone awakened us at a
comparatively early hour
and a faculty wife real estate agent called asking
about if she might sell our house.
At first, I was unwilling to allow her to consider
it, but then a quick spousal
conference led to the conclusion to add $10,000 to
what the price we had
generally concluded as an acceptable sum the
previous night. and to tell this caller that she
could show the house to only one family and must do
it while we were at church the following day.
Thus, Sunday afternoon at about dark, we were
totally unprepared for the knock on the door when
the smiling sales lady handed us a signed contract
for the house at the price we had originally asked.
Paragraph.
As the weeks progressed that spring and the combat
between the chancellor and the president grew
more heated,
it now seems obvious
that
their disagreement
made it easier for the board to make a decision
regarding that matter.
A clarifying Reality was President Miller's
failure to shake the hand of Melanie's Ink Graft.
Another potential factor seems to have been the
board's discovery of the organized campaign
to encourage
Individuals all over the state. To urge. Let
Jarvis be selected as president. Two and a half
years earlier, about three years earlier.
Paragraph on Tuesday morning. Black Prescott had
a. Brief reception on 2nd floor of the Koch
building. where close associates could gather
and wish me well in the new task out west.
Early that morning I realized that I should go
thank Frank Hubert for his many years of positive
effect on my life, beginning with seventh grade
band director, 12th
grade principal,
appointment as dean of arts and sciences, and at
about the same time, I received a temporary
appointment as instructor.
When I. So I called to ask if I could have a few
minutes. To express appreciation. And hurried
over to the system building.
Knowing of the of the reception at the Koch
building. I had I tried to make my visit brief. But
then he asked me to pause.
and identify for him, quote, the five best
department heads on campus,
period, quote. When I responded that I was not sure
I could single them out that clearly, I suggested
that instead I try to pick the best out of each
college. And he asked that I do engineering first.
Quickly, I identified Charlie Holland from
chemical engineering.
And then he asked
why I had not mentioned Chuck Sampson.
I responded.
that he was not then a department head,
and silently did not want to mention to him that the
faculty had gone to Dean Fred Benson
to complain about
the lack of organizational progress
Before in the department. Before Doctor Samson.
Ended his service as department head. He
continued with questions about. Doctor Samson.
So when I got back to the Coke building. I quickly
pulled. Miller. Vestal Prescott.
And coldest aside. And told him that I thought I had
just gotten a clue. About. One of the items at the
upcoming board agenda.
Because Doctor Miller had mentioned on Monday. At
my last staff meeting. That the board very well
might select a new vice chancellor for
engineering.
At their board meeting on Thursday and Friday of
that week.
When I summarize the question, the conversation
with Chancellor Hubert. The group agreed firmly.
Following the party, Joe and I went to have
paragraph. Following the party, Joe and I, the
reception, Joe and I went to have lunch with Ken and
Ann Pierce, old friends from the young couples
class, and then headed out, trying to drive as far
as we could that Tuesday afternoon and evening
making our way all the miles to Fort Stockton
a bit after midnight.
When we arrived in El Paso late the next afternoon,
we went to the president's residence to see how
well our furnishings would fit into that
beautiful old structure. Because on our previous
campus visits, we had not been able to go into the
house because my predecessor at UTEP had not given
us access.
When we reached the structure at perhaps 4
o'clock, it seemed that almost every employee of
the UTEP physical plant staff was there.
painting, papering, straightening. So we went on
to eat an early supper and came back to the
president's house and
with true delight wandered through that big,
that commodious old structure trying to identify
with pieces of masking tape the furnishings that
we wanted placed in storage,
and went on and then got to our motel
accommodations at about 1030,
as was the habit in that era. Of all travelers, I
stopped at the desk, the motel, to see if there were
any messages or phone calls to return.
The clerk handed me a note
marked urgent, quote, call Dr. Prescott at
President Miller's home, period, quote.
The urgent say the. The note of urgency.
Certainly.
Caught my attention. So I asked when the call had
come. And the clerk. Showed me that she had
written. Obvious reception at 730 Mountain Time.
Well, I began shaking my head and Joe asked me what
the matter was and I told her. Adding that. I felt it
must be something serious. Because Doctor
Prescott would not have been calling to wish
simply they wish us good luck.
I wondered if possibly there had been an accident
involving one of the Miller daughters. But then,
in an attempt at humor, continued with the
thought,
quote, but who knows? The board is meeting
tomorrow. Anything could happen. Period, quote.
So she asked, are you going to call? And I said, no,
it is too late. Now, 1130 Central Time, I'll call in
the morning.
At about 7 o'clock the next morning. I was awakened
by a reporters call. Asking for. From the Brian
Eagle. And later from one of the Houston papers
asking. For my comment. About the. Regents.
Termination of President Miller. Of Jarvis
Miller service as president, Texas A&M. the
previous afternoon.
Paragraph.
Since that time, I've learned that Dr. and Mrs.
Miller
had hosted the board chairman, vice chairman, and
one other member of the board, their home on
Tuesday evening. In the hope to cultivate
goodwill.
And apparently thought. That their effort had
some success. Then Wednesday at noon. The entire
board. Was at the president's home for lunch.
Thus. When Doctor Miller received a call to come to
the board meeting. Come to the board quarters.
Near the end of the working day.
He apparently thought that he was going. That he
would learn. Of his victory. In the tug of
administrative war.
When he walked in the boardroom, they told him that
as a 5 o'clock that day. His services as president
had been terminated and that he was being
reassigned. To. The. Agriculture Research
Center. At West Laco.
The next day, the board appointed Chuck Sampson as
interim president.
So,
Joe and I began our service in El Paso at the time of
true change on the campus at A&M.
And perhaps at that point, should cease this
recitation. And I thank you very much.
My task as dean of faculty has perhaps increased a
bit in its breadth and responsibility with the
departure of Dr. Winerdi, Charles McCandless,
from education. The associate dean of education
came over to join us, and Chuck brought a great deal
of warmth, quality, and capability to the team.
Most research matters now went to a
research area.
And I became the, more than ever, the most likely
recipient of every matter relating to academics,
especially those in which faculty were directly
involved.
These included some interesting termination
some
episodes
where faculty members were terminated
for
cause
and lawsuits.
One of the paragraph one of the more interesting
matters we had to deal with soon was the visit of a
federal investigating team
looking at the continuing at the continuing
effects
of
segregation of segregation in public higher
education in the south
as a part of that review
federal investigators
spent about a week at A&M
and a similar period
at Prairie View
plus the same time at the University of Texas at
Austin and at Texas Southern.
President Miller assigned me to coordinate with
that group
to try to keep him aware of what they, quote, were up
to.
and to give the visitors whatever assistance they
might need.
One of my first impressions was a bit of a shock when
the team supposedly
well-versed in higher education matters asked
if the terms put all of these in quotes, lecturer,
professor, instructor, and teacher could be used
interchangeably as substitutes for each other.
Late in the week after we became comparatively
well acquainted,
I asked the group if there was some way that
they might recommend...
I asked the group if there was a way they might
recommend that engineering and agriculture at
Prairie View be moved to College Station to become
part of the flagship campus, bringing faculty,
students, and so forth.
My argument was that this would immediately give
A&M an appropriate cadre of black faculty and
students faculty, staff, and students.
Further, I contended that the alternative
was that Prairie View, by comparison, would never
be able to be first class in those fields when
compared to other land grant institutions.
In a few moments, the group indicated their
personal agreement
with the conclusions I was offering,
but then just as quickly indicated that they did
not believe they would be well advised to dare to
offer such a proposal.
And thus, an opportunity was missed.
They did ask what I would suggest Prairie View, the
Prairie View of the future might become. And I
suggested that they recommend that Prairie View
be designated as the state's primary arts and
science institution.
that with its because of its location not far from
the urban the increasing urban sprawl northwest
of houston
that before many decades passed
that second oldest of all texas public higher
education campuses would be located in a place
that might attract a large number of Houstonians,
of Houston area residents.
In my opinion, however, few of them would be
interested in agriculture
and that the without real competitive quality in
engineering
a program in that field there would not attract
Houstonians or many other
highly qualified students from Texas or
elsewhere.
Nevertheless, none of the suggestions worked.
And the final result of the panel study was simply
to encourage all southern states to give better
additional funding to the historically black
institutions.
Paragraph.
One of the
interesting areas of effort that came my way as
dean of faculties
was working with the Department of
Intercollegiate Athletics
having tried to play football and run track in high
school and for a couple years at Austin College, I
enjoyed athletic events greatly,
particularly because of the spirit of A&M.
Soon after Dr. Williams arrived,
he
decided not to renew the contract of Gene
Stallings as head football coach.
Beebs, as he was known by everyone
since his earliest years, had played for the
legendary Bear Bryant and come to A&M as the
youngest head coach of a major American football
program.
In one of his early, in his second or third year, he
won the Southwest Conference and beat Bear and the
Alabama Crimson Tide in the Cotton Bowl.
Then the program
declined and Coach Stallings
was unable to build a strong rapport with the
faculty.
I have said to a number of individuals
As he began to,
as his program, quote, began to go down the drain,
most of the faculty sat on their hands and did
nothing to hinder that decline, period, quote.
Dr. Williams, called upon Bud Wilkinson, who had
recently retired as head coach, as the splendidly
successful head coach at the University of
Oklahoma,
to serve as a consultant.
And he apparently recommended Emory Bellard,
B-E-L-L-A-R-D,
the offensive coordinator and backfield coach at
the University of Texas, Who had created who had
been the creator? Of the very successful. Quote
wishbone. Offense. Quote that had put Daryl Royal
and the Longhorns.
Near the top of the national. Rankings every year.
Coach Blard came. and brought with him a highly
energetic staff.
One of the more noticeable recruiting techniques
was that some of the Houston recruits were brought
to College Station by helicopter,
which landed at Kyle Field.
On those Saturdays, I was often asked to speak to
the recruits and to welcome them to college
station,
a task which I very
much enjoyed and
from which I derived deep personal honor.
In those sessions, I attempted to describe A&M as
honestly as I knew how and to try to lay out for those
young
individuals the importance of their decision
About where they might go to school. But their
major academic made.